# Contact

## SLEPc e-mail

The SLEPc maintenance e-mail, <slepc-maint@upv.es>, is intended for users to

  * report bugs or portability problems,
  * ask for assistance during installation,
  * ask for clarification,
  * ask for help in tracking down bugs, and
  * request new features within SLEPc.

Before sending a _bug report_ , please consult the [SLEPc documentation](../documentation/index), the [Frequently Asked Questions](../documentation/faq), and the [GitLab issues](https://gitlab.com/slepc/slepc/-/issues).

:::{Important}
If you are sending an e-mail asking for assistance in _installation_ of SLEPc, please attach the log files generated by the configuration process. These files are located under a subdirectory named `$PETSC_ARCH/lib/slepc/conf/` in SLEPc's main directory.

  * The configuration log is `configure.log`
  * The compilation log is `make.log`
:::

Regarding usage from programming languages other than C/C++, we note the following:

  * The Fortran interface should cover most of SLEPc's functionality. Please report any omission or malfunction.
  * The Python interface may also be incomplete. If you need a function that is missing in the interface, please [add an issue at SLEPc's GitLab site](https://gitlab.com/slepc/slepc/-/issues).

:::{note}
 slepc4py is included in the SLEPc distribution since version 3.15.
:::

## GitLab Issues

An alternative to e-mail is to [open an issue at SLEPc's GitLab site](https://gitlab.com/slepc/slepc/-/issues). The advantage of this approach is that the discussion is public and hence other users may read it at a later time.

## Consulting Services

The SLEPc team can provide consulting and/or training services to users that do not want to invest effort in learning and developing a SLEPc-based application, or that have special requirements currently not available in SLEPc. This type of service is available for a fee. For additional details, contact us via <slepc-maint@upv.es>.

## Additional Information

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 1

mail_list
developers
acknowledgement
```
